---
layout: post
title:  "A Mediaition on John McCain"
date:   2020-11-06 16:07:29 -0500
categories: Politics
---
The first memory I have of John McCain was the 2008 election. My dad, an engineer in the Air Force, listed off the facts associated with McCain.  He was a POW. He could no longer raise his arms above his shoulder. He was a maverick (I had no idea of what this meant then). I was 14 to 15 at the time of the election and I was not a politically astute teenager. Politics then were still an abstract concept much in the same way death or adulthood are. He would continue to pop up in my life for various reasons throughout my adolescence and extracted about as much thought as one would reasonably expect of any average high school and college aged student.  

He would continue to be no more than the occasional mental blip until the Trump campaign and subsequent election. It was at this point McCain was held as a moral bastion against Trump's gleeful shameless behavior. Certainly, here was a man that could (and would) stand up and restore the GOP to its rightful place as the moral center. The extent to which he did that can be argued about at length. It crescendoed when he voted against repealing Obamacare only a month before his eventual passing. His passing worked on much the same level as many passings of people you know through the news. 

To me McCain's maverick branding appeared to be little more than typical political narrative creation. He did introduce Sarah Palin into the electorate after all. I never saw anything more than a politician with an impressive (perhaps over-exaggerated) military background. An Eisenhower for Gen-Xs. As with most legacies, his was made more complicated by things that he could not control (his daughter's gaffes for example). 

It was not until I came across a David Foster Wallace piece from 2000 on McCain that began a new sort of reflection began. Most importantly McCain's POW war record. I do not consider myself a cynical person. In fact, relatively speaking to most twenty somethings I would place myself on the more idealistic/hopeful side of the spectrum (somewhere in the 70-85% percentile). But McCains' POW story served as a litmus test of my own cynicism. I was not aware of the filter I place on all information (and particularly from the political arena). A sort of desensitization machine to bring information back to a more understated format. It served as a defense mechanism against getting too emotionally involved in a narrative or individual. I thought back to the times I have read an article and felt sure this would be the thing to end us all or the policy that really changes something or the condemning evidence of a reviled politician. It didn't feel good when you are confronted by another truth. I felt duped and silly. Thus the filter was installed (another less euphemistic term could be the bullshit reader) 

My guess would be everyone has always had this installed ever since mass media began. The millennial edition being the most acute and sensitive device on the market (and what will certainly be overpassed by the new Gen Z variety hitting markets in the next 2-4 years). It is necessary and good in the aggregate. I think of opinions as slowly gathered over time, akin to a juicing process. Each new piece of information acts as an orange and a small amount of juice is extracted each time. It is not until 6-8 oranges are juiced before there is enough to have a meaningful glass (or opinion). This sort of process is good in the aggregate and is a necessary if one is to retain their sanity. But one can almost immediately see the flaw. If everything is an orange what happens when a cup of real orange juice is handed to you? And you only absorb a fraction of its juice. Stories like McCain's are lost in the filter. For instance, stories of McCain's POW get reframed into a variety of scenarios depending on the intensity of one's filter. Perhaps he was a POW but he was in a camp that treated American's with extreme reverence because of America's perceived power? Maybe he was a POW but only for a few days? Or even he was never REALLY a POW? Not to say that any of these were held as truth in my mind but more as possible realities. All possible scenarios swirled in my mind and never warranted further investigation. 

 So one can imagine the rather jarring (and vulnerable) feeling when the facts of McCain's POW trials were uncovered. They are as follows:

McCain, on his 23rd bombing mission, was shot down by a missile 
McCain, in order to save his life, ejects from the aircraft and subsequently fractures both arms, breaks a leg and sustains a concussion.
Upon ejection, McCains falls and lands in a small lake in Hanoi (what would have happened if McCain had fallen onto hard ground instead?)
The Vietnamese soldiers fished McCain out and bayoneted him in the groin.
The Vietnamese soldiers break McCain's shoulder with the end of their rifle 
McCain's knee is at a 90 degree angle and a bone is protruding from the skin
He is driven to camp. 
Two fractures are set and two other fractures are left untreated 
Groin wound is left untreated. 
McCain sits in a cell for several months. 
John McCain's father is named head of all naval forces in the Pacific. 
In response, the Vietnamese offer to release McCain. 
John McCain refuses to be released as the Naval code among officers is that POWs be released in the order they were captured.
The Vietnamese respond by breaking McCain's arm, break his ribs, and knock his teeth out. 
McCain spends the next four years in Hoa Loa in a dark cell. 
I implore whoever is reading to reread each bullet point over and think about each point for 15-20 seconds. It is difficult for me to read and not feel singularly privileged. A reality so foreign but also, bizarrely, cinematic. It is difficult to hear about pain and sacrifice like this and think of it in any other way. I feel this exact same story could be used for an action hero prior to his revenge-fueled rampage. It becomes much easier, then, to see how so much hope could be placed on McCain in 2000. Cynicism had been well baked into the political process by 2000 (and I am sure much earlier). But a story like that has the power to bust through. And bust through he did, giving Bush (all but then appointed as the Republican candidate in 2000) all he could muster. 

As I moved my way through the Foster piece (to which I'd recommend reading) the only comp I had in mind was Barack Obama in 2008. Even then I could tell Obama was a different sort of politician, at least in the way elicited hope and enthusiasm (and equal parts hostility and vitriol). I remember my History teacher peeling off his collard shirt to reveal the iconic Barack Obama Hope t-shirt on election day.  

Fast forward eleven years and Obama seems to be on the trajectory that McCain himself traveled. His comments about cancel culture at the Obama Foundation Summit were met with derision. It is difficult to watch this sort of precipitous fall and assume that this is not the default state. The compromises, the gaffes, the out-of-touch opinions are inevitable. No one can outrun it. 

There is more to unpack than the certainty of the fall. This cycle can be seen in anyone in the public light. The need to build up and tear down humans is seen across all arenas. The concern is the aftermath. How many times can someone use words like duty, compassion, honor, and justice and fall short of these ideals before the words lose any significance  other than means to an end: I want you to behave in a way that is good for me. 

Politicians lie and it hurts. A "Frequently bought together" item of the bullshit detector is the irony modal. Much more intelligent people than me have written about irony and post-modernism and the insidious, ubiquitous effects it has. What hope do concepts like duty and honor have against well-deployed irony? Especially when those exact concepts seem to be little more than coated sales pitches not all that different from "Just Do It", "I'm lovin' it". 

What we are left with is rather dangerous cocktail: A population growing increasingly wary of any and all appeals. Politicians growing awareness of this fact. And how things appear to be trending is a perverse, almost masochistic relationship to politicians. It appears extraordinarily difficult to breakthrough it and impossible to sustain it. 

When you combine the withering of ideals inside a democracy, what are you left with but a fruit with a rotting core? Democracy is a form of government with idealism and hope at its core. As the center hollows out cynicism and irony will move into the vacuum. We are left with the machinations of democracy but none of the heart. Kurt Vonnegut wrote of "...the heartbreaking necessity of lying about reality and the heartbreaking impossibility of lying about it." It seems to me democracy was never more than some sort of ornamentation and it is beginning to unravel like a loose thread on a sweater. 

I offer little in the way of solutions. The problem is made worse by political language that feels so hermetically sealed and devoid of emotion that it is easy to forget that for many these decisions are life and death. It is this exact tension Trump was alluding to during his tirades against those who accused him of acting "un-presidential." Viewed on a sunny day it could be seen as promising that perhaps there is an electorate out there so starved for truth that even an ugly truth is better than a beautiful lie. Viewed on a rainy one it could be seen as the death knell of this little experiment; a group apathetic and perhaps deep down aware of the folly of it all and looking for a way to wrap this whole thing up a little faster. 

I find myself thinking about someone to lift us out of this sludge we are in. A leader who could restore some truth. A person who, scanning the landscape, figured that virtues, even if never hit attained are worth striving for. I find myself storing away a touch of hope for that person, even knowing now what appears to be the end state of folks who stake that as their claim. And I'm not the only one. I'm just not sure if there is enough left. 