---
layout: post
title:  "In Defense of Fantasy Football"
date:   2020-11-06 16:07:29 -0500
categories: Politics
---
I'd put Fantasy Football in the final 4 of things most likely to be made fun of. The total amount of eye rolls, shrugs, and hollow smiles fantasy football conversation sparked has to be in the billions? With good reason. I enjoy fantasy football (enjoy could be replaced with "have a mild obsession for) That being I have still been caught in the hopeless conversation with a fellow FF fanatic who seems determined to convince anyone who will listen of their managerial brilliance of picking up DJ Chark in week 2. The stone-cold seriousness certain people can talk about their teams is enough to make even the most patient person squirm.

This is not meant as a piece to convince anyone to begin playing fantasy football. Or be more tolerant of it. At best this is a piece to help folks understand one person's feeling towards the enterprise. At worst, a desperate rationalization of someone who knows there are at more important things to be thinking about.

I am concluding year 8 (or perhaps year 7; there is a debate over the inclusion of our first year). The league is comprised of high school and college friends. We run a podcast for the league. We have an active (read: productivity draining) GroupMe. We hold a destination draft each year in a city at the choosing of the champion on Labor day. We have an owner's meeting in the spring. In my estimation, Fantasy football is the only mechanism we have to stay connected , and I am not sure something would take its place if it disappeared.

This does bring up an interesting chicken or egg dilemma. Is the Fantasy Football league the byproduct of the warmth and camaraderie we have towards one another? Or is the warm and camaraderie a byproduct of Fantasy Football? I am not sure and it is impossible to know for certain. I know I am happy I do not have to find out. 
Perhaps you are gifted with this aspect of life. Perhaps you have a list of everyone you have decided to care about in your life and use a sophisticated formula to ensure they feel cared for. Or maybe you have a extra sense and can detect when a relationship is in need of some proper attention. Or maybe your relationships are so strong that you simply feel a little off center until you check in. And if you do that is wonderful. I would say be grateful but I am guessing you already are.

For others, including myself, maintaining friendships is difficult. I can go months and months without a single word exchanged between people who will almost certainly be in my wedding. And to be sure the instances in which we are together flow seamlessly, as any good friendship should. And in your 20s there are enough organic opportunities to see your friends. Weddings, holidays back in the home town, more free time etc. For as hard as it can be now, it will only get tougher. Careers fling people to different parts of the country. Children enter the picture. Responsibilities grow. Before you know it you are 50 and the only friendships you may have are more of the "acquaintances you see often and who you don't really like all the much but they are around and bring over wine and sure they're fine" variety.

And from what I see the best tool to combat this (admittedly not dire) reality is silly, frivolous Fantasy Football. Ostensibly we are there for that but along the way we get the fuel of friendship. Who is moving? Who got promoted? Who was broken up with? Plus the requisite shit-giving and trash talking.

Loneliness is increasing. 30% of millenials often or always feel lonely. The second most common household type is a single occupant. The reasons for this are even more interesting but exceedingly more complicated and will be left out of this piece (if you are interested I would recommend starting here). The effects of loneliness are well-known and documented. Maintaining current friendships is exceedingly difficult once the real world hits. And creating a new friendship out of thin air? When you are usually only have a handful of spare hours a week, and a headache, and a gnawing sense you are forgetting something, and also falling behind, and honestly? Just really tired.

Other friend groups have their own version of Fantasy Football. I suspect that others are just as odd. C.S. Lewis said, "Friendship is born at that moment when one person says to another: ‘What! You too? I thought I was the only one." Liking fantasy football is far more ubiquitous than Dungeons and Dragons. But fantasy football has been the source of a lot of laughs and love in my life and I am thankful for it.